[1] The *Labor Code of the Philippines* took effect on November 1, 1974.
[2] See the policy declarations in Sec. 3, Article XIII of the *1987 Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines.*  See also **R.A. No. 10911** (2016), *“An Act Prohibiting Discrimination Against Any Individual in Employment on Account of Age and Providing Penalties Therefor,”* also known as the *“Anti-Age Discrimination in Employment Act.”* This law enunciates the state policy to: “(a) promote employment of individuals on the basis of their abilities, knowledge, skills and qualifications rather than their age; (b) prohibit arbitrary age limitations in employment; and (c) promote the right of all employees and workers, regardless of age, to be treated equally in terms of compensation, benefits, promotion, training and other employment opportunities.”
[3] As amended by **P.D. No. 570-A** , *“Amending Certain Sections of PD No. 442 entitled Labor Code of the Philippines,”* (1974). Take note, however, that under Sec. 2 (1), Article IX-A of the Philippine Constitution, the “civil service embraces all branches, subdivisions, instrumentalities, and agencies of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations with original charters.” See also **Article 291** of this Code.
[4] Provisions of this Chapter were amended by **R.A. No. 6657** (1988), *“Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law* ,” which expired on June 10, 2008.
[5] See also **R.A. No. 6657** , *“Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law of 1988,* ” Sec. 2 of which provides: “ **Declaration of Principles and Policies.** - It is the policy of the State to pursue a Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP). The welfare of the landless farmers and farmworkers will receive the highest consideration to promote social justice and to move the nation toward sound rural development and industrialization, and the establishment of owner cultivatorship of economic-size farms as the basis of Philippine agriculture….”
[6] Modified by Sec. 17 of **R.A. No. 6657** which provides that “[i]n determining just compensation, the cost of acquisition of the land, the current value of like properties, its nature, actual use and income, the sworn valuation by the owner, tax declarations, and the assessment made by government assessors shall be considered. The social and economic benefits contributed by the farmers and the farmworkers and by the government to the property as well as the non-payment of taxes or loans secured from any government financing institution on the said land shall be considered as additional factors to determine its valuation.”
[7] The second paragraph of Article 10 was superseded by **R.A. No. 6657** :  “Sec. 27. **Transferability of Awarded Lands.** - Lands acquired by beneficiaries under this Act may not be sold, transferred or conveyed except through hereditary succession, or to the government, or the LBP, or to other qualified beneficiaries for a period of ten (10) years: *Provided* , *however* , That the children or the spouse of the transferor shall have a right to repurchase the land from the government or LBP within a period of two (2) years….”
[8] This and other articles in the immediately succeeding Title should be read in correlation with **R.A. No. 8042** (1995), as amended by **R.A. No. 10022** (2010), or the *“Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act.”*
[9] **R.A. No. 8759** *, “An Act Institutionalizing a National Facilitation Service Network Through the Establishment of a Public Employment Service Office in Every* *Province, Key City and Other Strategic Areas Throughout the Country”* or the *Public Employment Service Office (PESO) Act of 1999* , established the PESOs consistent with the state policy to “provide full employment and equality of employment opportunities for all, and for this purpose, to strengthen and expand the existing employment facilitation service machinery of the government particularly at the local levels.” It was amended in 2014 by **R.A. No. 10691** , *An Act Defining the Role of the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), the Local Government Units (LGUs),* *and Accredited Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) in the Establishment and Operation of the Public Employment Service Office (PESO), and the Operation of* *Job Placement Offices in Educational Institutions (EIs), Amending for the Purpose Sections 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9 of Republic Act No. 8759, Otherwise Known as the “Public* *Employment Service Office Act of 1999.”* Sec. 3 of R.A. No. 10691 provides: “ *Establishment of the Public Employment Service Office* . – To carry out the above declared policy, there shall be established in all provinces, cities, and municipalities a Public Employment Service Office, hereinafter referred to as ‘PESO’, which shall be operated and maintained by local government units (LGUs). The PESOs shall be linked to the regional offices of the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) for coordination and technical supervision, and to the DOLE central office, to constitute the national public employment service network.” See **DOLE D.O.** **No. 157** (2016) for specific regulations. See **R.A. No. 6685** which requires private contractors to whom national, provincial, city, and municipal public works projects have been awarded under contract to hire at least 50% of the unskilled labor and 30% of skilled labor requirements from the available bona fide residents in the locality where an infrastructure project is to be undertaken. **DPWH D.O. No. 130** (2016) provides the guidelines to implement the said law. **R.A. No. 6685** which requires private contractors to whom national, provincial, city, and municipal public works projects have been awarded under contract to hire at least 50% of the unskilled labor and 30% of skilled labor requirements from the available bona fide residents in the locality where an infrastructure project is to be undertaken. **DPWH D.O. No. 130** (2016) provides the guidelines to implement the said law. See also **R.A. No. 10869 (2016)** or the “JobStart Philippines Act” which aims to shorten the youth's school to work transition by enhancing the knowledge and skills acquired in formal education or technical training by jobseekers in order for them to become more responsive to the demands of the labor market. Refer to **DOLE D.O. No. 179** (2017) for specific regulations.
[10] Sec. 3 of **E.O. No. 797** (1982), *“Reorganizing the Ministry of Labor and Employment, Creating the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration, and For* *Other Purposes,”* created the Bureau of Local Employment which assumed the functions of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and the domestic employment functions of the Bureau of Employment Services.
[11] Functions enumerated under paragraph (a) have been superseded by Sec. 17, Chapter 4, Title VII, Book IV of **E.O. No. 292** (1987), *“Administrative Code of* *1987”* : Sec. 17. **Bureau of Local Employment.** - The Bureau of Local Employment shall: **(1)** Formulate policies, standards and procedures on productive manpower resources, development, utilization and allocation; **(2)** Establish and administer a machinery for the effective allocation of manpower resources for maximum employment and placement; **(3)** Develop and maintain a responsive vocational guidance and testing system in aid of proper human resources allocation; **(4)** Regulate and supervise private sector participation in the recruitment and placement of workers locally under such rules and regulations as may be issued by the Secretary; **(5)** Establish and maintain a registration or work permit system to regulate employment of aliens; **(6)** Develop and maintain a labor market information system in aid of proper manpower and development planning; **(7)** Formulate employment programs designed to benefit disadvantaged groups and communities; and **(8)** Perform other functions as may be provided by law.
[12] Paragraph (b) of Article 15 was superseded by **E.O. No. 797** (1982), Sec. 4 of  which created the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration (POEA) which is vested with “original and exclusive jurisdiction over all cases, including money claims, involving employer-employee relations arising out of or by virtue of any law or contract involving Filipino workers for overseas employment, including seamen.” However, through R.A. No. 8042 (1995), this jurisdiction over employer-employee relations cases has been transferred to the NLRC. Under Sec. 28 of the *Rules Implementing the Migrant Workers’ Act* (1996), POEA retains its jurisdiction in: **(a)** all cases which are administrative in character, involving or arising out of violations of rules and regulations relating to licensing and registration of recruitment and employment agencies or entities; and **(b)** disciplinary action cases and other special cases which are administrative in character, involving employers, principals, contracting partners, and Filipino migrant workers.
[13] **P.D. No. 1177,** “ *Revising the Budget Process in Order to Institutionalize the Budgetary Innovations of the New Society.* ”
[14] Article 25 allows the private sector to participate in the recruitment and placement of workers, locally or overseas, subject to the issuance of a license from the BLE or the POEA, respectively.
[15] The functions of the Overseas Employment Development Board (OEDB) are now being undertaken by the POEA. These, as provided for in Sec. 3 of **EO No.**
[247] , “ *Reorganizing the POEA and for Other Purposes,”* shall refer to the POEA’s powers and functions to: **(a)** Regulate private sector participation in the recruitment and overseas placement of workers by setting up a licensing and registration system; **(b)** Formulate and implement, in coordination with appropriate entities concerned, when necessary, a system for promoting and monitoring the overseas employment of Filipino workers taking into consideration their welfare and the domestic manpower requirements; **(c)** Protect the rights of Filipino workers for overseas employment to fair and equitable recruitment and employment practices and ensure their welfare; **(d)** Exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and decide [all claims arising out of an employer-employee relationship or by virtue of any law or contract involving Filipino workers for overseas employment including the disciplinary cases [ *Note:* *Sec. 10 of* *R.A. No. 8042* *, "Migrant Workers Act* *of 1995," transferred the original and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and decide money claims and cases involving overseas Filipino workers to the NLRC.* ] and all pre- employment cases which are administrative in character involving or arising out of violation or requirement laws, rules and regulations including money claims arising therefrom, or violation of the conditions for issuance of license or authority to recruit workers. All prohibited recruitment activities and practices which are penal in character as enumerated and defined under and by virtue of existing laws, shall be prosecuted in the regular courts in close coordination with the appropriate Departments and agencies concerned; **(e)** Maintain a registry of skills for overseas placement; **(f)** Recruit and place workers to service the requirements for trained and competent Filipino workers by foreign governments and their instrumentalities and such other employers as public interest may require; **(g)** Promote the development of skills and careful selection of Filipino workers; **(h)** Undertake overseas market development activities for placement of Filipino workers; **(i)** Secure the best terms and conditions of employment of Filipino contract workers and ensure compliance therewith; **(j)** Promote and protect the well- being of Filipino workers overseas; **(k)** Develop and implement programs for the effective monitoring of returning contract workers, promoting their re-training and re-employment or their smooth re-integration into the mainstream of national economy in coordination with other government agencies [ *Note:* *This was* *modified by Sec. 17 of* *R.A. No. 8042* *.* ]; **(l)** Institute a system for ensuring fair and speedy disposition of cases involving violation or recruitment rules and regulations
[16] The Welfare and Training Fund for Overseas Workers organized in 1977 is now known as the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA). Under Sec. 3 of **R.A. No. 10801** (2016), *“An Act Governing the Operations and Administration of the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration,”* otherwise known as the OWWA Act, the OWWA shall exercise the following functions: **(a)** To protect the interest and promote the welfare of member-OFWs in all phases of overseas employment in recognition of their valuable contribution to the overall national development effort; **(b)** To facilitate the implementation of the provisions of the Labor Code of the Philippines (Presidential Decree No. 442, as amended) and the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995 (Republic Act No. 8042, as amended), concerning the responsibility of the government to promote the well-being of OFWs. Pursuant thereto, and in furtherance thereof, it shall provide legal assistance to member-OFWs; **(c)** To provide social and welfare programs and services to member-OFWs, including social assistance, education and training, cultural services, financial management, reintegration, and entrepreneurial development services; **(d)** To provide prompt and appropriate response to global emergencies or crisis situations affecting OFWs and their families; **(e)** To ensure the efficiency of collections and the viability and sustainability of the OWWA Fund through sound, judicious, and transparent investment and management policies; **(f)** To undertake studies and researches for the enhancement of the social, economic, and cultural well-being of member-OFWs and their families; **(g)** To develop, support and finance specific projects for the welfare of member-OFWs and their families; and **(h)** To ensure the implementation of all laws and ratified international conventions within its jurisdiction.
[17] **R.A. No. 8042** is silent on this respect. The Boards referred to in this Article pertain to the defunct OEDB and the NSB. With the changes introduced by E.O. No. 797 as amended by E.O. No. 247, it now refers to the POEA. This article, however, should be read in relation to Secs. 29 and 30 of R.A. No. 8042 which provides for the formulation of the deregulation plan on recruitment activities and the gradual phase-out of regulatory functions of the POEA.
[18] Now the Commission on Filipinos Overseas attached to the Department of Foreign Affairs, pursuant to **B.P. Blg. 79,** *“An Act Creating the Commission on* *Filipinos Overseas and For Other Purposes* . *”*
[19] The functions of the National Seamen Board are now being undertaken by the POEA pursuant to **E.O. No. 797** . Under **R.A. No. 8042** (1995), jurisdiction over employer-employee relations cases has been transferred to the NLRC.
[20] Renumbered as Article 229.
[21] Superseded by **R.A. No. 8042** , “ *Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act* ,” which defines the role and responsibilities of the respective government agencies involved in the protection of OFWs. The law provides for the creation of the Legal Assistant for Migrant Workers' Affairs, and the Country-Team Approach as the mode under which Philippine embassies or their personnel will operate in the protection of the Filipino migrant workers and promotion of their welfare.
[22] Refer to the POEA Standard Employment Contract (SEC).
[23] With the creation of the POEA in place of the OEDB, this Article was superseded by Sec. 4 of **E.O. No. 247** , and further amended by Sec. 32 of **R.A. No. 8042** , which provided for three more members to the POEA and OWWA Governing Boards, to represent the women, sea-based and land-based sectors, respectively, to be appointed by the President of the Philippines. This provision already reflects these changes. Sec. 4 of E.O. No. 247 provides: “Sec. 4. **Structural Organization** . – The Administration shall consist of the Governing Board, the Office of the Administrator, the Offices of such number of Deputy Administrators as may be necessary, Office of the Director for each of the principal subdivisions of its internal structure: (a) The Governing Board shall be composed of the Secretary of Labor and Employment as Chairman, the Administrator and a third member, considered well-versed in the field of overseas employment who shall be appointed by the President to serve for a term of two (2) years; (b) The Administrator and such Deputy Administrator and Directors as may be necessary shall be appointed by the President upon recommendation of the Secretary; (c) The functional structure of the Administration shall be established along the areas of: market development, employment, welfare, licensing, regulation and adjudication. Each of the principal substantive subdivisions of the Administration shall be headed by a Director and shall have such departments and units as may be necessary.”
[24] The Boards referred to are the boards of the now-defunct OEDB and NSB. The POEA absorbed the powers and functions of the OEDB and NSB.
[25] Sec. 23 of **R.A. No. 8042** , as amended by Sec. 14 of R.A. 10022, and Sec. 3 of **R.A. No. 10022** mandate the POEA to “regulate private sector participation in the recruitment and overseas placement of workers by setting up a licensing and registration system.” For local employment of industry and domestic workers, see **DOLE D.O. Nos. 216 (2020)** and **217 (2020)** .
[26] See also Sec. 6 (j) of R.A. No. 8042, as amended.
[27] Refer to Sec. 1, Rule I of the **POEA Rules on Licensing and Regulation of Recruitment Agencies for Land-based Workers** . See also Section 6 (n) of R.A. No. 8042, as amended, which classifies as illegal recruitment “to allow a non-Filipino citizen to head or manage a licensed recruitment/manning agency.”
[28] For overseas employment, see Sec. 1 (b) of Rule I, Part II of the POEA Rules on Licensing and Regulation of Recruitment Agencies for Land-based Workers. For local employment, see Sec. 2, Rule II of the DOLE’s PRPA Guidelines.
[29] See Sec. 7, Rule I of the POEA Rules on Licensing and Regulation. See also Sec. 9, Rule II of the DOLE’s PRPA Guidelines.
[30] For Arts. 30 and 31, see Sec. 4, Rule II of the POEA Rules on Licensing and Regulation. See also Sec. 27, Rule IV of the PRPA Guidelines for Local Employment.
[31] The POEA can enforce the liability under the bond, as decided by the Supreme Court in *Finman General Assurance v. Inocencio* , **G.R. No. 90273-75** (1989).
[32] See also Rule V (Fees, Costs, and Contributions) of the POEA Rules. For local employment, see Sec. 29, Rule V of the PRPA Guidelines.
[33] See also Sec. 1, Rule X, Part I and Sec. 3, Rule I, Part VII of the POEA Rules. For local employment, see Sec. 61, Rule IX of the PRPA Guidelines.
[34] These prohibited acts also constitute illegal recruitment as redefined by **R.A. No. 8042** .
[35] Under Sec. 10 of **R.A. No. 10022** , the POEA, in the exercise of adjudicatory power, may impose the penalty of reprimand, suspension, or cancellation or revocation of license for pre-employment/recruitment violation cases. For local employment, see Rule VI of the **PRPA Guidelines.**
[36] Ministry of Labor is now the Department of Labor and Employment. The OEDB has been replaced by the POEA. General Orders and Letters of Instruction refer to issuances by the President of the Republic in his capacity as Commander-In-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.
[37] See also Sec. 23 of R.A. No. 8042, as amended by Sec. 14 of R.A. 10022, and Sec. 3 of R.A. No. 10022.
[38] See also Rule III (Inspection of Agencies) of the POEA Rules. For local employment, see Rule IX of the PRPA Guidelines.
[39] See Sec. 6 of **R.A. No. 8042** , as amended.
[40] Article 38 par. (c) was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in *Salazar v. Achacoso* , **G. R. No. 81510** (1990).
[41] The penalties provided under Article 39 originally apply to both local and overseas employment. In view of the changes introduced by **R.A. No. 8042** , illegal recruitment involving overseas employment is now penalized under the provision of Section 7 of the said law and Article 39 now stands to cover only cases involving local employment. Thus, for overseas employment, Section 7 of **R.A. No. 8042** , as amended, applies.
[42] The OEDB and NSB are both defunct. Forfeiture of cash and surety bonds is now in favor of the POEA or the Regional Offices of the Department which has jurisdiction over the place where the private recruitment and placement agency or branch office is located.
[43] See **DOLE D.O. No. 221** (2021), *“Revised Rules and Regulations for the Issuance of Employment Permits to Foreign Nationals* . *”* See also **DOLE L.A. No. 16** (2021).
[44] Arts. 289 and 290 were renumbered as Arts. 288 and 289, respectively, by virtue of **E.O. No. 111** (1986). They are now renumbered as Arts. 303 and 304, respectively.
[45] This Title was substantively modified and superseded by **R.A. No. 7796** , *The TESDA Act of 1994,* therefore, impliedly inoperative.
[46] See also Sec. 3 (Statement of Goals and Objectives) of **R.A. No. 7796** .
[47] Expanded by Sec. 4 of the TESDA Act of 1994.
[48] First paragraph of this Article was repealed by Sec. 5 (TESDA Creation) and the second paragraph by Sec. 7 (Composition of the TESDA Board) of **R.A. No.**
[7796] , *The TESDA Act of 1994.*
[49] Superseded by Sec. 10 (TESDA Secretariat) of *The TESDA Act of 1994.*
[50] Sec. 19 (TESDA Committees) and Sec. 20 (Skills Development Centers) of *The TESDA Act of 1994* absorbed the provisions of this Article.
[51] The task to establish and implement national standards has been transferred to TESDA as embodied in Sec. 22 (Establishment and Administration of National Trade Skills Standards) of *The TESDA Act of 1994* .
[52] Superseded by Sec. 23 (Administration of Training Programs) of *The TESDA Act of 1994* .
[53] This article should be read in relation to Sec. 26 (Industry Boards ) of *The TESDA Act of 1994.*
[54] With the abolition of the NMYC and the creation of TESDA in its place, the term "Council" now refers to TESDA. The Bureau of Employment Services was replaced by the Bureau of Local Employment by virtue of Sec. 3 of **E.O. No. 797** .
[55] Superseded by Sec. 27 (Incentive Schemes) of *The TESDA Act of 1994* .
[56] Superseded by Sec. 10 of *The TESDA Act of 1994* which provides for the creation of the TESDA Secretariat and specifies the Secretariat’s functions and responsibilities.
[57] Superseded by Sec. 14 (g) of *The TESDA Act of 1994* which expressly provides for Regional TESDA Offices.
[58] This article was reproduced with modifications as Sec. 17 of **R.A. No. 7796** or *The TESDA Act of 1994* .
[59] Superseded by Sec. 36 (Implementing Rules and Guidelines) of *The TESDA Act of 1994* .
[60] The definitions of terms under this Article have been superseded by paragraphs (j), (k), (l), and (m) of Sec. 4 (Definition of Terms) of **R.A. No. 7796** : **(j)** “ *Apprenticeship* ” training within employment with compulsory related theoretical instructions involving a contract between an apprentice and an employer on an approved apprenticeable occupation; **(k)** “ *Apprentice* ” is a person undergoing training for an approved apprenticeable occupation during an established period assured by an apprenticeship agreement; **(l)** “ *Apprenticeship*  *Agreement* ” is a contract wherein a prospective employer binds himself to train the apprentice who in turn accepts the terms of training for a recognized apprenticeable occupation emphasizing the rights, duties and responsibilities of each party; **(m)** “ *Apprenticeable*  *Occupation* ” is an occupation officially endorsed by a tripartite body and approved for apprenticeship by the Authority….
[61] For Article 59 (a), see Sec. 12 of **R.A. No. 7610** , *"Special Protection of Children Against Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act,"* as amended by Sec. 2 of **R.A. No. 9231,** which provides that, except under exceptional cases, “children below fifteen (15) years of age shall not be employed.”
[62] As amended by Sec. 1, **E.O. No. 111** (1986).
[63] As amended by Sec. 1, **E.O. No. 111** (1986).
[64] In instances where the student causes injury to a third person in the course of doing a task in behalf of the school, the school can be held liable for damages under Article 2180 of the Civil Code of the Philippines.
[65] For other training programs, please see **R.A. No. 7686,** *Dual Training System Act of 1994,* and **R.A. No. 7323** , *Summer Program for Employment of Students,* as amended by **R.A. No. 10917** (2016).
[66] Superseded by par. (n) of Sec. 4 (Definition of Terms) of **R.A. No. 7796** , *The TESDA Act of 1994* , which defines learners as “persons hired as trainees in semi- skilled and other industrial occupations which are non-apprenticeable. Learnership programs must be approved by the Authority.”
[67] **R.A. No. 7277** (1992), *Magna Carta for Disabled Persons* , as amended by **R.A. No. 9442** , has affected certain provisions on handicapped workers under this Chapter.
[68] Sec. 4 (a), Chapter I, Title I of **R.A. No. 7277** defines “disabled persons” as “those suffering from restriction of different abilities, as a result of a mental, physical or sensory impairment, to perform an activity in the manner or within the range considered normal for a human being.”
[69] Sec. 5 (Equal Opportunity for Employment), Chapter I, Title II of **R.A. No. 7277** provides that “[n]o disabled persons shall be denied access to opportunities for suitable employment. A qualified disabled employee shall be subject to the same terms and conditions of employment and the same compensation, privileges, benefits, fringe benefits, incentives or allowances as a qualified able-bodied person. Five percent (5%) of all casual, emergency and contractual positions in the Department of Social Welfare and Development; Health; Education, Culture and Sports; and other government agencies, offices or corporations engaged in social development shall be reserved for disabled persons.”
[70] Superseded by Sec. 7 (Apprenticeship), Chapter I, Title II of Disabled Persons, of **R.A. No. 7277** , which provides: “Subject to the provision of the Labor Code as amended, disabled persons shall be eligible as apprentices or learners; *Provided* , That their handicap is not much as to effectively impede the performance of job operations in the particular occupation for which they are hired; *Provided, further* , That after the lapse of the period of apprenticeship if found satisfactory in the job performance, they shall be eligible for employment.”
[71] See also the definition of managerial employee in Article 219 (m), previously Article 212, of this Code.
[72] The second paragraph of Article 83 does not apply to health workers in government service. They are excluded from the coverage of Arts. 82 through 96 and their employment benefits are defined in **R.A. No. 7305** (1992), *Magna Carta of Public Health Workers.* Likewise, under Sec. 15, Rule X, Book III of the **Omnibus** **Rules Implementing the Labor Code** , the forty-hour workweek will not apply if there is a training agreement between a resident physician and the hospital, and the training program is duly accredited or approved by appropriate government agency. In such case, there is no employer-employee relation on account of the approved training program.
[73] The **Omnibus Rules Implementing the Labor Code** allows meal periods to be less than 60 minutes, under specified cases, provided that such shorter meal periods are credited as compensable hours.
[74] See also **Department Advisory No. 02 s. 2004** , *Implementation of Compressed Work Week Schemes* , **Department Advisory No. 02 s. 2009** ,  *Guidelines on the* *Adoption of Flexible Work Arrangements* , and **Department Advisory No. 04 s. 2010** , *Guidelines on the Implementation of Flexible Work Arrangements and the* *Exemption from the Nightwork Prohibition for Women Employees in the Business Process Outsourcing Industry* .
[75] " *National Assembly* " shall refer to the " *Congress* " as the country has reverted to the presidential form of government.
[76] See Sec. 4 (Preference of employee), Rule III, Book III of the **Omnibus Rules Implementing the Labor Code** , which states that: “Where, however, the choice of the employee as to his rest day based on religious grounds will inevitably result in serious prejudice or obstruction to the operations of the undertaking and the employer cannot normally be expected to resort to other remedial measures, the employer may so schedule the weekly rest day of his choice for at least two (2) days in a month.”
[77] Section 2 of **E.O. No. 203** (1987) provides that “the terms ‘legal or regular holiday’ and ‘special holiday’, as used in laws, orders, rules and regulations or other issuances shall now be referred to as ‘regular holiday’ and ‘special day’, respectively.”
[78] This was originally substituted as Article 258 of the Code pursuant to **P.D. No. 570-A** (1974), and was later amended by **E.O. No. 203** (1987), *Providing a List* *of Regular Holidays and Special Days to be Observed Throughout the Philippines and for Other Purposes.* The latest amendment pertaining to holidays can be found in **R.A. No. 9849** (2009), *“An Act Declaring the Tenth Day of Zhul Hijja, the Twelfth Month of the Islamic Calendar, A National Holiday for the Observance of Eidul* *Adha, Further Amending for the Purpose Section 26, Chapter 7, Book I of Executive Order No. 292…”* Arts. 169 and 170 of **P.D. No. 1083** , *Code of Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines,* recognize the following as legal Muslim holidays officially observed in in the Provinces of Basilan, Lanao del Norte, Lanao del Sur, Maguindanao, North Cotabato, Sultan Kudarat, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur, and in the Cities of Cotabato, Iligan, Marawi, Pagadian, and Zamboanga: *Amun Jadid* (New Year), which falls on the first day of the first lunar month of Muharram; *Maulid-un-Nabi* (Birthday of the Prophet Muhammad), which falls on the twelfth day of the third lunar month of Rabi-ul- Awwal; *Lailatul Isra Wal Mi'raj* (Nocturnal Journey and Ascension of the Prophet Muhammad), which falls on the twenty-seventh day of the seventh lunar month of Rajab; *Id-ul-Fitr* (Hari Raya Puasa), which falls on the first day of the tenth lunar month of Shawwal, commemorating the end of the fasting season; and *Id-ul-Adha* (Hari Raja Haji), which falls on the tenth day of the twelfth lunar month of Dhu 1-Hijja.
[79] Section 2 of **R.A. No. 9849** amended Sec. 26, Chapter 7, Book I of **E.O. No. 292** , *The Administrative Code of 1987* , *As Amended* , to read as follows: “SEC. 26. **Regular Holidays and Nationwide Special Days.** - (1) Unless otherwise modified by law, order, or proclamation, the following regular holidays and special days shall be observed in the country: (a) **Regular Holidays** *New Year’s Day*  -January 1 *Labor Day* - Monday nearest May 1 *Maundy Thursday*  - Movable Date *Independence Day*  - Monday nearest June 12 *Good Friday*  - Movable Date *National Heroes Day* - Last Monday of August *Eidul Fitr*  - Movable Date *Bonifacio Day* - Monday nearest November 30 *Eidul Adha*  - Movable Date *Christmas Day* - December 25 *Araw ng Kagitingan*  (Bataan and Corregidor Day) - Monday nearest April 9 *Rizal Day* - Monday nearest December 30 (b) **Nationwide Special Holidays** *Ninoy Aquino Day* - Monday nearest August 21 *Last Day of the Year* - December 31 *All Saints Day* - November 1  (c) In the event the holiday falls on a Wednesday, the holiday will be observed on the Monday of the week. If the holiday falls on a Sunday, the holiday will be observed on the Monday that follows: “ *Provided* , That for movable holidays, the President shall issue a specific date shall be declared as a nonworking day.”
[80] See **R.A. No. 8972** , *Solo Parents' Welfare Act* , for Parental Leave “granted to a solo parent to enable him/her to perform parental duties and responsibilities where physical presence is required”; **R.A. No. 9262** , *Anti-Violence Against Women and their Children Act of 2004* , for the Battered Woman Leave, thus “victims under this Act shall be entitled to take a paid leave of absence up to ten (10) days in addition to other paid leaves under the Labor Code and Civil Service Rules and Regulations, extendible when the necessity arises as specified in the protection order”; **R.A. No. 9710** , *Magna Carta of Women* , which grants a special leave benefit of two months with full pay after a surgery caused by gynecological disorders; and **R.A. No. 8187** , *Paternity Leave Act of 1996* , which grants every married male employee “to a paternity leave of seven (7) days with full pay for the first four (4) deliveries of the legitimate spouse with whom he is cohabiting.” See also **Article**
[131] for notes on maternity leave benefit.
[81] Amended by **R.A. No. 11360** (2019), “ *An Act Providing that Service Charges Collected by Hotels, Restaurants and Other Similar Establishments be* *Distributed in Full to all Covered Employees, Amending for the Purpose Presidential Decree No. 442, as Amended, Otherwise Known as the “Labor Code of the* *Philippines.”*  See **DOLE D.O. No. 206** (2019) for specific regulations. See also **DOLE LA No. 10 (2020)** .
[82] Changes under this Title are largely introduced by **R.A. No. 6727** or the "Wage Rationalization Act." Sec. 3 of R.A. No. 6727 expressly amended Article 99, Chapter II, of this Title. Incorporated are Articles 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, and 127 under Chapter V, entitled "Wage Studies, Wage Agreements, and Wage Determination."
[83] See also **R.A. No. 9178** (2002), *BMBE Act of 2002,* which exempts from the minimum wage law a barangay micro business enterprise (BMBE).
[84] As amended by Section 3 of **R.A. No. 6727** (1989), *Wage Rationalization Act,* which provides that “[t]he minimum wage rates for agricultural and non- agricultural employees and workers in each and every region of the country shall be those prescribed by the Regional Tripartite Wages and Productivity Boards.”
[85] This rule against diminution of supplements or benefits is applicable if it is shown that the grant of the benefit is based on an express policy or has ripened into a practice over a long period of time and that the practice is consistent and deliberate. There is no unlawful diminution if the benefit being claimed is a contingent or contingent benefit, such as a bonus, whose demandability depends on certain preconditions. See also **P.D. No. 851** (1975), *Requiring all Employers* *to Pay Their Employees a 13* *th* *Month Pay.* Under Sec. 2 of the *Rules and Regulations Implementing P.D. No. 851* , “’Thirteenth-month pay’ shall mean one twelfth (1/12) of the basic salary of an employee within a calendar year.”
[86] See Book III, Rule VII, Chapter I, Section 9 of the *Omnibus Rules Implementing the Labor Code* , which provides that all workers paid by results shall receive not less than the applicable statutory minimum wage rates “for the normal working hours which shall not exceed eight hours work a day, or a proportion thereof for work of less than the normal working hours” and further outlines the steps in the computation of the “adjusted minimum wage rates for workers paid by results.”
[87] See also **DOLE LA No. 26 (2020)** , *“Payment of Wages and Other Monetary Benefits Through Transaction Accounts.”*
[88] See **L.A. No. 01** (2014), *Time and Interval of Payment of Wages in Subcontracting/Job Contracting Arrangement under D.O. No. 18-A (2011)* . Please be guided that D.O. 18-A was superseded by D.O. No. 174 (2017).
[89] See Sec. 7 of **R.A. No. 6727** (1989), *Wage Rationalization Act,* which provides that “[u]pon written permission of the majority of the employees or workers concerned, all private establishments, companies, businesses, and other entities with twenty five (25) or more employees and located within one (1) kilometer radius to a commercial, savings or rural bank shall pay the wages and other benefits of their employees through any of said banks and within the period of payment of wages fixed by P.D. No. 442, as amended.” See also the *Labor Advisory on Payment of salaries thru Automated Teller Machine (ATM)* (1996), which allows payment through ATM of banks provided the following conditions are met: (1) The ATM system of payment is with the written consent of the employees concerned; (2) The employees are given reasonable time to withdraw their wages from the bank facility which time, if done during working hours, shall be considered compensable hours worked; (3) The system shall allow workers to receive their wages within the period or frequency and in the amount prescribed under the Labor Code, as amended; (4) There is a bank or ATM facility within a radius of one (1) kilometer to the place of work; (5) Upon request of the concerned employee/s, the employer shall issue a record of payment of wages, benefits and deductions for a particular period; (6) 6. There shall be no additional expenses and no diminution of benefits and privileges as a result of the ATM system of payment; (7) The employer shall assume responsibility in case the wage protection provisions of law and regulations are not complied with under the arrangement.
[90] For Arts. 106 to 109, see **DOLE**  **D.O. No. 174** (2017), *Rules Implementing Articles 106 to 109 of the Labor Code, As Amended,* supplemented by **DOLE**  **D.C.** **No. 01** (2017), *Clarifying the Applicability of Department Order No. 174, Series of 2017,* and **DOLE**  **L.A. No. 10** (2016), on *Prohibition Against Labor-Only Contracting.*
[91] See Article 1729 of the Civil Code of the Philippines in relation to the liability of an indirect employer under Arts. 107 and 109.
[92] As amended by Sec. 1 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989), *An Act to Extend Protection to Labor, Strengthen the Constitutional Rights of Workers to Self-Organization,* *Collective Bargaining and Peaceful Concerted Activities, Foster Industrial Peace and Harmony, Promote the Preferential Use of Voluntary Modes of Settling Labor* *Disputes...,* which expanded the concept of worker preference in the event of bankruptcy.
[93] See also **R.A. No. 10706** (2015), *“Seafarers Protection Act,”* which protects seafarers against ambulance chasing and imposition of excessive fines, thereby limiting such fees to ten percent (10%) of the compensation or benefit awarded to the seafarer or his/her heirs.
[94] For Articles 112-115, see DOLE Labor Advisory No. 11 (2014), Non-Interference in the Disposal of Wages and Allowable Deductions. See also DOLE D.O. No. 195 (2018).
[95] Arts. 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, and 127 were incorporated by **R.A. No. 6727** , *Wage Rationalization Act of 1989* .
[96] Section 8 of **R.A. No. 9178** (2002), *Barangay Micro Business Enterprises (BMBEs) Act* , exempts BMBEs from the coverage of the Minimum Wage Law. Under Section 5 (b) of **R.A. No. 10644** (2014), *Go Negosyo Act,* the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), through the Negosyo Center in the city or municipal level, shall have the sole power to issue the Certificate of Authority for BMBEs to avail of the benefits provided by **R.A. No. 9178** .
[97] See Sec. 12 of R.A. No. 6727, as amended by **R.A. No. 8188** , *An Act Increasing the Penalty and Increasing Double Indemnity for Violation of the Prescribed* *Increases or Adjustment in the Wage Rates,* which provides that: “Any person, corporation, trust, firm, partnership, association or entity which refuses or fails to pay any of the prescribed increases or adjustments in the wage rates made in accordance with this Act shall be punished by a fine not less than Twenty-five thousand pesos (P25,000) nor more than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000) or imprisonment of not less than two (2) years nor more than four (4) years, or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court: *Provided* , That any person convicted under this Act shall not be entitled to the benefits provided for under the Probation Law.”
[98] See **D.O. No. 183** (2017) for specific regulations *.*
[99] Renumbered as Article 224.
[100] Paragraph (b) of Article 128 was amended by **R.A. No. 7730** (1994), *An Act Further Strengthening the Visitorial and Enforcement Powers of the Secretary of* *Labor and Employment, Amending for the Purpose Article 128 (B)….*
[101] As amended by Sec. 2 of **R.A. No.6715** (1989).
[102] Renumbered as Article 229.
[103] See **DOLE D.O. Nos. 150** (2016),
[155] (2016),
[156] (2016), and
[182] (2017).
[104] **RA No. 10151** , *“An Act Allowing the Employment of Night Workers, Thereby Repealing Articles 130 and 131 of P.D. No. 442, as amended, Otherwise Known* *as the Labor Code of the Philippines”* (2011) repealed the former Arts. 130 and 131: ART. 130. **Nightwork Prohibition.** – No woman, regardless of age, shall be employed or permitted or suffered to work, with or without compensation:
[105] Superseded by **R.A. No. 11210 (2019** ), “An Act Increasing the Maternity Leave Period to One Hundred Five (105) Days for Female Workers With an Option to Extend for an Additional Thirty (30) Days Without Pay, and Granting an Additional Fifteen (15) Days for Solo Mothers, and for Other Purposes.” See also its **Implementing Rules and Regulations** and **DOLE D.A. No. 1 (2019)** for specific regulations.”
[106] As amended by Sec. 1 of **R.A. No. 6725** (1989), *“An Act Strengthening the Prohibition on Discrimination Against Women with Respect to Terms and Conditions* *of Employment, Amending for the Purpose Article One Hundred Thirty-Five of the Labor Code, As Amended.”* See also Sec. 3 of **R.A. No. 7877** , *“Anti-Sexual* *Harassment Act of 1995”* which defines work, education or training-related sexual harassment.
[107] This refers to Sec. 2 of **R.A. No. 6725** (1989): “Section 2. The Secretary of Labor and Employment is hereby authorized to promulgate the necessary guidelines to implement this Article in accordance with the generally accepted practices and standards here and abroad.”
[108] Arts. 288 and 299 were renumbered as Arts. 303 and 304, respectively.
[109] Sec. 3, Rule XII, Book III of the *Omnibus Rules Implementing the Labor Code* provides: “Section 3. **Eligibility for employment** . — Any person of either sex, between 15 and 18 years of age, may be employed in any non-hazardous work. No employer shall discriminate against such person in regard to terms and conditions of employment on account of his age.” Reference can be made to Sec. 12 of **R.A. No. 7610** (1992), *“Special Protection of Children Against Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act,"* as amended by **R.A. No. 7658** (1994) and **R.A. No. 9231** (2003), which provides: Sec. 12. **Employment of Children.** - Children below fifteen (15) years of age shall not be employed except: 1) When a child works directly under the sole responsibility of his/her parents or legal guardian and where only members of his/her family are employed: *Provided* , *however* , That his/her employment neither endangers his/her life, safety, health, and morals, nor impairs his/her normal development: *Provided, further* , That the parent or legal guardian shall provide the said child with the prescribed primary and/or secondary education; or 2) Where a child's employment or participation in public entertainment or information through cinema, theater, radio, television or other forms of media is essential: *Provided* , That the employment contract is concluded by the child's parents or legal guardian, with the express agreement of the child concerned, if possible, and the approval of the Department of Labor and Employment: *Provided, further* , That the following requirements in all instances are strictly complied with: (a) The employer shall ensure the protection, health, safety, morals and normal development of the child; (b) The employer shall institute measures to prevent the child's exploitation or discrimination taking into account the system and level of remuneration, and the duration and arrangement of working time; and (c) The employer shall formulate and implement, subject to the approval and supervision of competent authorities, a continuing program for training and skills acquisition of the child. In the above-exceptional cases where any such child may be employed, the employer shall first secure, before engaging such child, a work permit from the Department of Labor and Employment which shall ensure observance of the above requirements. For purposes of this Article, the term "child" shall apply to all persons under eighteen (18) years of age. **R.A. No. 7658** also added the following new sections to R.A. No. 7610: Sec. 12-A (Hours of Work of a Working Child); Sec. 12-B (Ownership, Usage and Administration of the Working Child's Income); Sec. 12-C (Trust Fund to Preserve Part of the Working Child's Income); and Sec. 12-D (Prohibition Against Worst Forms of Child Labor). See **DOLE D.C. No. 2** (2017), as amended by **D.C. No. 2** (2018), regarding the guidelines on the issuance of work permit for children below 15 years of age who are engaged in public entertainment or information. See also **R.A. No. 10911** (2016) or the *"Anti-Age Discrimination in Employment Act"* and **DOLE D.O. No. 170** (2017) for its specific regulations.
[110] See also **DOLE D.O. No. 149** (2016) and **DOLE D.O. No. 149-A** (2017).
[111] See also **R.A. No. 10917** (2016), *An Act Amending Certain Provisions of R.A. No. 9547 (2009) and R.A. No. 7323 (1992) or*  *Special Program for Employment* *of Students (SPES)* , which provides that “any person or entity employing at least ten (10) persons may employ poor but deserving students, out-of-school youth (OSY) or dependents of displaced or would-be displaced workers due to business closures, or work stoppages, or natural calamities, intending to enroll in any secondary, tertiary or technical-vocational institutions, fifteen (15) years of age but not more than thirty (30) years old” during summer and/or Christmas vacations for those enrolled in the secondary level and at any time of the year for OSY and those enrolled in tertiary, vocational or technical education. For its specific regulations, refer to **DOLE D.O. No. 175** (2017).
[112] **R.A. No. 10361** (2013), *Domestic Workers Act* or *Batas Kasambahay,* provides: “All articles or provisions of Chapter III (Employment of Househelpers) of Presidential Decree No. 442, as amended and renumbered by Republic Act No. 10151, are hereby expressly repealed. All laws, decrees, executive orders, issuances, rules, and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.” The Labor Code provisions on househelpers can also be reconciled with pertinent provisions of the Civil Code, e.g., Arts. 1689 to 1699 (Household Service).
[113] As amended by **P.D. No. 570-A** (1974), *Amending Certain Sections of P.D. No. 442.* The *Domestic Workers Act* (2013)  applies to all domestic workers employed and working within the country. The law defines “domestic work” as work performed in or for a household or households; while “domestic worker” or “ *Kasambahay”* is “any person engaged in domestic work within an employment relationship such as, but not limited to, the following: general househelp, nursemaid or “ *yaya* ”, cook, gardener, or laundry person, but shall exclude any person who performs domestic work only occasionally or sporadically and not on an occupational basis. The term shall not include children who are under foster family arrangement, and are provided access to education and given an allowance incidental to education, i.e. “ *baon* ”, transportation, school projects and school activities. xxx”
[114] Pursuant to Sec. 11 of **R.A. No. 10361** , “[a]n employment contract shall be executed by and between the domestic worker and the employer before the commencement of the service in a language or dialect understood by both the domestic worker and the employer. The domestic worker shall be provided a copy of the duly signed employment contract which must include the following: (a) duties and responsibilities of the domestic worker; (b) period of employment; (c) compensation; (d) authorized deductions; (e) hours of work and proportionate additional payment; (f) rest days and allowable leaves; (g) board, lodging and medical attention; (h) agreements on deployment expenses, if any; (i) loan agreement; (j) termination of employment; and (k) any other lawful condition agreed upon by both parties.
[115] As amended by **R.A. No. 7655** (1993). Note that Sec. 24 of **R.A. No. 10361** prescribes that the minimum wage of domestic workers shall not be less than: (a) Two thousand five hundred pesos (P2,500.00) a month for those employed in the National Capital Region (NCR); (b) Two thousand pesos (P2,000.00) a month for those employed in chartered cities and first class municipalities; and (c) One thousand five hundred pesos (P1,500.00) a month for those employed in other municipalities.  See also **Wage Order No. CAR-DW-01** (2015), *Prescribing New Minimum Wage Rates for Domestic Workers in the Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR),*  **Wage** **Order No. RB VI - D.W. 01** (2015), *Prescribing New Minimum Wage Rates for Domestic Workers in Region VI – Western Visayas,* **Kasambahay Wage Order No. RB** **VIII-01** (2016), *Prescribing New Minimum Wage Rates for Domestic Workers in Eastern Visayas,* raising the rates to t wo thousand five hundred pesos (P2,500.00) a month for those employed in chartered cities and first class municipalities; and to two thousand pesos (P2,000.00) a month  for those employed in other municipalities.
[116] Sec. 30 (Social and Other Benefits) of **R.A. No. 10361** requires that a domestic worker who has rendered at least one (1) month of service be covered by the SSS, PhilHealth, and HDMF or Pag-IBIG, and be entitled to all the benefits in accordance with the pertinent provisions provided by law.
[117] Sec. 22 (Assignment to Nonhousehold Work) of **R.A. No. 10361** provides the assignment of a domestic worker to work in a commercial, industrial or agricultural enterprise at a wage rate lower than that provided for agricultural or nonagricultural workers. In such cases, the domestic worker shall be paid the applicable minimum wage.
[118] Sec. 9 (Right to Education and Training) of **R.A. No. 10361** provides that the employer shall afford the domestic worker the opportunity to finish basic education and may allow access to alternative learning systems and, as far as practicable, higher education or technical and vocational training. The employer shall adjust the work schedule of the domestic worker to allow such access to education or training without hampering the services required by the employer.
[119] Sec. 5 (Standard of Treatment) of **RA No. 10361** prohibits the employer or any member of the household from subjecting a domestic worker or “ *kasambahay* ” to any kind of abuse nor inflicting any form of physical violence or harassment or any act tending to degrade the dignity of a domestic worker.
[120] Sec. 6 (Board, Lodging and Medical Attendance) of **R.A. No. 10361** requires the employer to provide for the basic necessities of the domestic worker to include at least three (3) adequate meals a day and humane sleeping arrangements that ensure safety. The employer shall provide appropriate rest and assistance to the domestic worker in case of illnesses and injuries sustained during service without loss of benefits. At no instance shall the employer withdraw or hold in abeyance the provision of these basic necessities as punishment or disciplinary action to the domestic worker.
[121] Sec. 32 (Termination of Service) of **R.A. No. 10361** provides: “Neither the domestic worker nor the employer may terminate the contract before the expiration of the term except for grounds provided for in Sections 33 and 34 of this Act. If the domestic worker is unjustly dismissed, the domestic worker shall be paid the compensation already earned plus the equivalent of fifteen (15) days work by way of indemnity. If the domestic worker leaves without justifiable reason, any unpaid salary due not exceeding the equivalent fifteen (15) days work shall be forfeited. In addition, the employer may recover from the domestic worker costs incurred related to the deployment expenses, if any: *Provided* , That the service has been terminated within six (6) months xxx.”
[122] Sec. 32 (Termination of Service) of **R.A. No. 10361** states: “If the duration of the domestic service is not determined either in stipulation or by the nature of the service, the employer or the domestic worker may give notice to end the working relationship five (5) days before the intended termination of the service. The domestic worker and the employer may mutually agree upon written notice to pre-terminate the contract of employment to end the employment relationship.”
[123] Sec. 35 (Employment Certification) of **R.A. No. 10361** requires that “upon the severance of the employment relationship, the employer shall issue the domestic worker within five (5) days from request a certificate of employment indicating the nature, duration of the service and work performance.”
[124] See **D.O. No. 05** (1992), *Rule XIV of the Rules Implementing Book III of the Labor Code on Employment of Homeworkers,* for the regulations governing the employment of homeworkers, issued pursuant to Articles 5, 153, and 154 (now Arts. 5, 151, and 152, respectively).
[125] This chapter was inserted by **R.A. No. 10151** , *“An Act Allowing the Employment of Night Workers, Thereby Repealing Articles 130 and 131 of Presidential* *Decree No. 442, as amended, otherwise known as the Labor Code of the Philippines.”* See also **D.O. No. 119** (2012), *Rules Implementing Republic Act No. 10151.*
[126] See Sec. 3.e., Rule IV of **D.O. No. 156 (2016)** , *“Rules and Regulations Governing the Working and Living Conditions of Fishers on Board Fishing Vessels* *Engaged in Commercial Operation,”* which provides that fishers shall be entitled to “night shift differential of ten percent of their basic wage for work performed between10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.”
[127] **DOLE D.O. No. 119 (2012)** defines a “night worker” as “any employed person whose work covers the period from 10 o’clock in the evening to 6 o’clock the following morning provided that the worker performs no less than seven (7) consecutive hours of work.
[128] Sec. 4 (Mandatory facilities) of **D.O. 119** (2012) requires the following: **(a)** Suitable first-aid and emergency facilities as provided for under Rule 1960 of the OSHS; **(b)** Lactation station in required companies pursuant to R.A. No. 10028; **(c)** Separate toilet facilities for men and women; **(d)** Facility for eating with potable drinking water; and **(e)** Facilities for transportation and/or properly ventilated temporary sleeping or resting quarters, separate for male and female workers, shall be provided except where any of the following circumstances is present: *(i)* Where there is an existing company guideline, practice, or policy, collective bargaining agreement (CBA) or any similar agreement between management and workers providing for an equivalent or superior benefit; or *(ii)* Where the start or end of the night work does not fall within 12 midnight to 5 o’clock in the morning; or *(iii)* Where the workplace is located in an area that is accessible twenty-four (24) hours to public transportation; *(iv)* Where the number of employees does not exceed a specified number as may be provided for by the Secretary of Labor and Employment in subsequent issuances.
[129] See also **R.A. No. 11058 (2018)** , “An Act Strengthening Compliance with Occupational Safety and Health Standards and Providing Penalties for Violations Thereof.” For specific regulations, refer to **DOLE D.O. No. 198** (2018) **.**
[130] Section 1, Rule I, Book IV of the *Omnibus Rules Implementing the Labor Code* defines “first-aid treatment” as an “adequate, immediate and necessary medical and dental attention or remedy given in case of injury or sudden illness suffered by a worker during employment, irrespective of whether or not such injury or illness is work-connected, before more extensive medical and/or dental treatment can be secured. It does not include continued treatment or follow-up treatment for an injury or illness.”
[131] As amended by Sec. 26 of **P.D. No. 570-A** (1974). See also Rule I, Book Four, of the *Omnibus IRR of the Labor Code* for specific regulations.
[132] Refer to the *Occupational Safety and Health Standards* (Revised 1989), as Amended. See also **DOLE D.O. No. 154** (2016).
[133] As amended by Sec. 27 of **P.D. No. 570-A** (1974)
[134] Paragraphs (i), (j), (k), and (ee) are shown here as amended by **P.D. No. 1921** (1984), *Further Amending Certain Provisions of Title II, Book IV of the Labor* *Code of the Philippines.* Paragraphs (l) and (y) are shown here as amended **by P.D. No. 1368** (1978).
[135] Pursuant to **ECC Resolution No. 27999 (1984)** , for the injury and the resulting disability or death to be compensable, the injury must be the result of accident arising out of and in the course of employment. With the ruling of the Supreme Court on off-premises injury, the ECC passed **Resolution No. 3914-A** (1988) extending the compensable coverage for off-premises injury from near the premises up to the residence of the employee.
[136] See Rule III, Section 1 (b) of the *Amended Rules on Employees' Compensation* , which states that: “For the sickness and the resulting disability or death to be compensable, the sickness must be the result of an occupational disease listed under Annex ‘A’ of these Rules with the conditions set therein satisfied, otherwise, proof must be shown that the risk of contracting the disease is increased by the working conditions.”
[137] As amended by **E.O. No. 179** (1987).
[138] As amended by Section 1 of **P.D. No. 1368** (1978). Paragraph (y) was later superseded by Section 8 (m) of RA No. 8282 which defines *average monthly salary credit* as “the result obtained by dividing the sum of the last sixty (60) monthly salary credits immediately preceding the semester of contingency by sixty (60), or the result obtained by dividing the sum of all the monthly salary credits paid prior to the semester of contingency by the number of monthly contributions paid in the same period, whichever is greater: *Provided* , That the injury or sickness which caused the disability shall be deemed as the permanent disability for the purpose of computing the average monthly salary credit.”
[139] As amended by **P.D. No. 891** (1976), *Further Amending Title II, Book Four on Employees Compensation and State Insurance Fund* . First paragraph of (z) is deemed superseded by Section 8 (n) of **R.A. No. 8282** : “(n) Average daily salary credit ‐ The result obtained by dividing the sum of the six (6) highest monthly salary credits in the twelve ‐ month period immediately preceding the semester of contingency by one hundred eighty (180).”
[140] Second paragraph of (z) is deemed superseded by Sec. 2 (k) of **R.A. No. 8291** : “(k) Current Daily Compensation- The actual daily compensation or the actual monthly compensation divided by the number of working days in the month of contingency but not to exceed twenty-two (22) days.”
[141] As amended by Section 1 of **P.D. No. 891** (1976).
[142] As amended by Section 1 of **P.D. No. 1641** (1980).
[143] As amended by Sec. 16, of **P.D. No. 850** (1975).
[144] Rule I, Section 5 of the *Amended Rules on Employees Compensation* provides that “Filipinos working abroad in the service of an employer as defined in Section 3 hereof shall be covered by the System, and entitled to the same benefits as are provided for employees working in the Philippines.”
[145] As amended by **P.D. No. 1921** (1984).
[146] Sec. 699 of the *Revised Administrative Code* , as amended by **R.A. No. 1232** (1955): “Allowances in case of injury, death, or sickness incurred in performance of duty. — When a person in the service of the national government of a province, city, municipality or municipal district is so injured in the performance of duty as thereby to receive some actual physical hurt or wound, the proper Head of Department may direct that absence during any period of disability thereby occasioned shall be on full pay, though not more than six months, and in such case he may in his discretion also authorize the payment of the medical attendance, necessary transportation, subsistence and hospital fees of the injured person. Absence in the case contemplated shall be charged first against vacation leave, if any there be. xxx In case of sickness caused by or connected directly with the performance of some act in the line of duty, the Department head may in his discretion authorize the payment of the necessary hospital fees.
[147] Also known as the *Social Security Law.*
[148] Also known as the *Armed Forces Death Gratuity and Disability Pension Act of 1951* .
[149] Also known as the *Police Act of 1966* .
[150] As amended by Section 17 of **P.D. No. 850** (1975).
[151] The Philippine Medical Care Commission created under **R.A. No. 6111 (1969)** was merged with the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) and thereafter ceased to exist by virtue of **R.A. No. 7875** or the *National Health Insurance Act of 1995* .
[152] As amended by Section 19 (c) of **E.O. No. 126** (1987): “(c) Employees’ Compensation Commission which is hereby reorganized to include the Executive Director of the ECC as an *ex-oficio* member of the Commission.”
[153] As amended by Section 2, **P.D. No. 1368** (1978).
[154] As amended by Sec.19 (c), **E.O. No. 126** , originally added as a new paragraph by  Sec. 2 of **P.D. No. 1368** (1978).
[155] Paragraphs (f) and (j), and paragraphs (k) and (l), as amended and added, respectively, by Sec.18 of **P.D. No. 850** (1975).
[156] Renumbered as Article 196.
[157] As amended by Sec. 3 of **P.D. No. 1368** (1978).
[158] As amended by Sec. 3 of **P.D. No. 1641** (1980).
[159] As amended by Sec. 3 of **P.D. No. 1921** (1984). The Ministry of Budget and Management is now known as the Department of Budget and Management.
[160] As amended by Sec. 4 of **P.D. No. 1368** (1978)
[161] **R.A. No. 6111** or the *Philippine Medical Care Act of 1969* was repealed by **R.A. No. 7875** or the *National Health Insurance Act of 1995* , hence, this article now refers to the said repealing law.
[162] As amended by Sec. 2 of **E.O. No. 179** (1987).
[163] **ECC Board Resolution No. 96-10-0429** (1996) and **Board Resolution No. 12-09-21** (2012) increased the maximum ceiling for daily income benefit for Temporary Total Disability from P90.00 to P200.00 for the private and public sectors, respectively.
[164] Par. (b), as amended by Sec. 19 of **P.D. No. 850** (1975).
[165] As amended by Sec. 7 of **P.D. No. 1368** (1978).
[166] Par. (b), as amended by Sec. 5 of **P.D. No. 1641** (1980).
[167] Pars. (b) and (c), and pars. (f) and (g), as amended and added, respectively, by Sec. 7 of **P.D. 1368** (1978).
[168] Pars. (a), (b), and (d), as amended by Sec. 4 of **P.D. No. 1921** (1984), *Further Amending Certain Provisions of Title II, Book IV of the Labor Code of the* *Philippines* .
[169] Renumbered as Article 173.
[170] As amended by Sec. 8 of **P.D. No. 1368** (1978), *Amending Further Certain Provisions of Title II, Book Four of the Labor Code of the Philippines* .
[171] As amended by Sec. 3 of **E.O. No. 179** (1987), *Further Amending Title II, Book Four of the Labor Code of the Philippines* . The amount of Funeral Benefit was increased to P10,000 by virtue of **ECC Board Resolution No. 92-07-0032** (1992) for the private sector and **ECC Board Resolution No. 12-09-21** (2012) for the public sector.
[172] As amended by Sec. 5 of **P.D. No. 1921** (1984).
[173] See also **ECC Resolution No. 2127** , which lists situations wherein notice to the employer is no longer required, such as: **(1)** When the employee suffers the contingency within the employer’s premises; **(2)** When the employee officially files an application for leave of absence by reason of the contingency from which he suffers; **(3)** When the employer provides medical services and/or medical supplies to the employee who suffers from the contingency; **(4)** When the employer can be reasonably presumed to have knowledge of the employee’s contingency, in view of the following circumstances: **(4.1)** The employee was performing an official function for the employer when the contingency occurred; **(4.2)** The employee’s contingency has been publicized through mass media outlets; or **(4.3)** The specific circumstances of the occurrence of the contingency have been such that the employer can be reasonably presumed to have readily known it soon thereafter; and **(4.4)** Any other circumstances that may give rise to a reasonable presumption  that the employer has been aware of the contingency.
[174] As added by Sec. 9 of **P.D. No. 1368** (1978) and subsequently amended by Sec. 7 of **P.D. No. 1641** (1980), *Further Amending Title II, Book Four of the Labor* *Code of the Philippines* .
[175] Sec. 57 of **R.A. No. 7875** , *An Act Instituting a National Health Insurance Program for All Filipinos and Establishing the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation* or the *National Health Insurance Act of 1995* , repealed **E.O. No. 119** (1987), *Reorganizing the Ministry of Health* ; **P.D. No. 1519** (1969), *Revised Philippine Medicare* *Act* ;  and other laws applying to the Medicare. **R.A. No. 7875** (1995)  initiated the National Health Insurance Program intending to provide health insurance coverage and health care services for all Filipinos. To carry out the program, the law also created the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation, which has taken over the assets and functions of the Philippine Medical Care Commission. Under **R.A. No. 7875** (1995), an employee is defined as “any person who performs services for an employer in which either or both mental and physical efforts are used and who receives compensation for such services, where there is an employer-employee relationship” while an employer is defined as “a natural or juridical person who employs the services of an employee.”
[176] The DECS was renamed as the Department of Education (DepEd) under **R.A. No. 9155** (2001), *Governance of Basic Education Act.*
[177] As amended by Sec. 3 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989), *An Act to Extend Protection to Labor, Strengthen the Constitutional Rights of Workers to Self-Organization,* *Collective Bargaining and Peaceful Concerted Activities, Foster Industrial Peace and Harmony, Promote the Preferential Use of Voluntary Modes of Settling Labor* *Disputes, and Reorganize the National Labor Relations Commission, Amending for these Purposes Certain Provisions of Presidential Decree No. 442, As Amended,* *Otherwise Known As The Labor Code Of The Philippines, Appropriating Funds Therefore And For Other Purposes* .
[178] As amended by Sec. 4 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[179] As amended by Sec. 1 of **R.A. No. 10741** (2016), *An Act Strengthening the Operations of the National Labor Relations Commission, Amending for this Purpose* *Articles 220 and 222 of Presidential Decree No. 442, As Amended, Otherwise Known as the Labor Code of the Philippines.* The amendment raised the maximum number of Commission Attorneys assigned to the Office of the Chairman and each Commissioner from three to five. Likewise, the last paragraph was deleted: “No Labor Arbiter shall be assigned to perform the functions of the Commission Attorney nor detailed to the office of any Commissioner.”
[180] As amended by Sec. 2 of **R.A. No. 9347** (2006), *An Act Rationalizing the Composition and Functions of the National Labor Relations Commission* .
[181] As amended by Sec. 1 of **R.A. No. 10741** (2016), *An Act Strengthening the Operations of the National Labor Relations Commission, Amending for this Purpose* *Articles 220 and 222 of Presidential Decree No. 442, As Amended, Otherwise Known as the Labor Code of the Philippines.* The amendment deleted the requirement in the third paragraph for the Labor Arbiters to be “appointed by the President, upon recommendation of the Commission *en banc* to a specific arbitration branch, preferably in the region where they are residents” and “ *Provided,* That the labor arbiters who are presently holding office in the region where they are residents shall be deemed appointed thereat.”
[182] As amended by Sec. 4 of **R.A. No. 9347** (2006).
[183] As amended by Sec. 9, **R.A. No. 6715** (1989). See also Sec. 1, Rule V, **2005 Rules of Procedures of the NLRC** .
[184] Article 217 (a) (2) is qualified by Article 261 which grants voluntary arbitrators original and exclusive jurisdiction over all unresolved grievances arising from the CBA and company personnel policies. See also Sec. 10 of **R.A. No. 8042** on Money Claims.
[185] Renumbered as Article 279.
[186] **R.A. No. 7875** , *National Health Insurance Act of 1995* , repealed the laws applying to the Medicare and initiated the National Health Insurance Program intending to provide health insurance coverage and health care services for all Filipinos. To carry out the program, the law also created the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation, which has taken over the assets and functions of the Philippine Medical Care Commission.
[187] Pars. (a), (d), and (e) are shown herein as amended by Sec. 10 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[188] Article 220 was expressly repealed by Sec. 16 of **B.P. Blg. 130** (1981): “Section 16. Articles 220, 228, paragraph (f) of Article 251, Article 266, paragraph (b) of Article 273 of the Labor Code and all provisions of said Code and other laws, orders, decrees and rules and regulations inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed.” It read: Article 220. **Compulsory Arbitration.** The Commission or any Labor Arbiter shall have the power to ask the assistance of other government officials and qualified private citizens to act as compulsory arbitrators on cases referred to them and to fix and assess the fees of such compulsory arbitrators, taking into account the nature of the case, the time consumed in hearing the case, the professional standing of the arbitrators, the financial capacity of the parties, and the fees provided in the Rules of Court.
[189] As amended by Sec. 11 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[190] As amended by **P.D. No. 1691** (1980). See also Sec. 6, Rule III of the *2011 Rules of Procedure of the NLRC,* which provides that a non-lawyer may appear before the Commission or a Labor Arbiter if: **(a)** he represents himself as party to the case; **(b)** he represents a legitimate labor organization, which is a party to the case; **(c)** he represents a member or members of a legitimate labor organization existing in the employer’s establishment who are parties to the case; **(d)** he is duly accredited member of any legal aid office duly recognized by the Department of Justice or Integrated Bar of the Philippines; and **(e)** he is the owner or president of a corporation or establishment which is a party to the case. He needs to present: *(1)* a certification under oath that he is so authorized, and *(2)* a copy of the resolution of the board of directors of the corporation granting him such authority.
[191] As amended by Sec. 12 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[192] As amended by Sec. 13 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989). See See **2018 DOLE Sheriffs’ Manual on Execution of Judgments** and **2012 NLRC Sheriffs’ Manual on** **Execution of Judgment** .
[193] This provision, which deals with the contempt powers of the Secretary of Labor and Employment, appears to be misplaced in this Title (National Labor Relations Commission).
[194] As amended by Sec. 14 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[195] Sec. 22 of **E.O. No. 126** (1987), as amended by EO No. 251, created the National Conciliation and Mediation Board (NCMB) to “absorb the conciliation, mediation, and voluntary arbitration functions of the Bureau of Labor Relations,” hence, the terms "Bureau" and "regional office of the Department of Labor" shall be understood to read as "Board" and Regional Branches of the NCMB," respectively. See Sec. 3, Rule V (Settlement of Dispute), of *The Rules of Procedure of the Single Entry Approach* (2011), issued pursuant to the provisions of **D.O. No. 107** (2010) *, Guidelines on the Single Entry Approach Prescribing a 30-day Mandatory Conciliation-Mediation Services for All Labor and Employment Cases* : “Sec. 3. **Settlement Agreements on Monetary Claims** . – Where the parties entered into a compromise of monetary claims arising from violation of labor standards law, the amount of the compromise shall be fair and reasonable, and not contrary to law, public morals and public policy. “The fairness/reasonableness of settlement agreements shall depend on the totality of the circumstances, the degree of voluntariness and credibility of the consideration. “The insistence of the requesting party to accept a given amount despite having knowledge of his/her rightful claims shall give rise to the presumption of absence of fraud, violence or coercion and his/her voluntariness to accept the settlement agreement. “The foregoing circumstances shall be fully disclosed in the settlement agreement.”  See also Rule XII (Compromise Agreement) of **D.O. No. 183** (2017), *Revised Rules on the Administration and Enforcement of Labor Laws Pursuant to Article 128* *of the Labor Code, as Renumbered* , which provides: “ **Compromise Agreement** . – Should the parties arrive at an agreement as to the mode of payment or compliance, said agreement shall be reduced in writing and signed by the parties in the presence of the Regional Director or his/her duly authorized representative. The Compromise Agreement shall be bind the parties provided that the person making the compromise did so voluntarily, with full understanding of the facts and of the consequences thereof, and for a consideration which is adequate and reasonable…”
[196] The former Article 228, which was expressly repealed by Sec. 16 of **B.P. Blg. 130** (1981), read as follows: “Art. 228. **Indorsement of Cases to Labor Arbiters.** – (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this Article, the Labor Arbiter shall entertain only cases endorsed to him for compulsory arbitration by the Bureau or by the Regional Director with a written notice of such indorsement or non-indorsement. The indorsement or non-indorsement of the Regional Director may be appealed to the Bureau within ten (10) working days from receipt of the notice. (b) The parties may, at any time, by mutual agreement, withdraw a case from the Conciliation Section and jointly submit it to a Labor Arbiter, except deadlocks in collective bargaining.” * **IMPORTANT:** This new Article 228 was inserted by Sec. 1 of **R.A. No. 10396** (2013), *An Act Strengthening Conciliation-Mediation as a Voluntary Mode of* *Dispute Settlement for all Labor Cases.* See **DOLE D.O. No. 151** (2016) for specific regulations.
[197] As amended by Sec. 15 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[198] As amended by Sec. 15 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[199] As amended by Sec. 15 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[200] Renumbered as Articles 264, 265, and 268, respectively.
[201] As amended by Sec. 1 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007), *An Act Strengthening the Workers' Constitutional Right to Self-Organization.*
[202] Inserted as a new provision pursuant to Sec. 2 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[203] The opening phrase *"Subject to Article 238"* has been rendered inoperative by virtue of Sec. 5 of **E.O. No. 111** (1986)  which repealed the then Article 238 (Conditions for Registration of Federations or National Unions) and second paragraphs of Articles 239 and 241 “relating to the restructuring of the labor movement along one-union-one industry policy.”
[204] As amended by Sec. 3 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[205] Renumbered as Article 247.
[206] As inserted by Sec. 4 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[207] As amended by Sec. 5 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007), which reduced to three the ten grounds for cancellation of union registration under the old Article 239. Under the old provision, the ground for cancellation were: **(a)** Misrepresentation, false statement or fraud in connection with the adoption or ratification of the constitution and by-laws or amendments thereto, the minutes of ratification and the list of members who took part in the ratification; **(b)** Failure to submit the documents mentioned in the preceding paragraph within thirty (30) days from adoption or ratification of the constitution and by-laws or amendments thereto; **(c)** Misrepresentation, false statements or fraud in connection with the election of officers, minutes of the election of officers, the list of voters, or failure to submit these documents together with the list of the newly elected/appointed officers and their postal addresses within thirty (30) days from election; **(d)** Failure to submit the annual financial report to the Bureau within thirty (30) days after the closing of every fiscal year and misrepresentation, false entries or fraud in the preparation of the financial report itself; **(e)** Acting as a labor contractor or engaging in the "cabo" system, or otherwise engaging in any activity prohibited by law; **(f)** Entering into collective bargaining agreements which provide terms and conditions of employment below minimum standards established by law; **(g)** Asking for or accepting attorney’s fees or negotiation fees from employers; **(h)** Other than for mandatory activities under this Code, checking off special assessments or any other fees without duly signed individual written authorizations of the members; **(i)** Failure to submit list of individual members to the Bureau once a year or whenever required by the Bureau; and **(j)** Failure to comply with requirements under Articles 237 and 238.
[208] As inserted by Sec. 6 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[209] The second paragraph of this article was repealed by Sec. 5 of **E.O. No. 111** (1986). The second paragraph read as follows: “Incumbent affiliates of existing federations or national unions may disaffiliate only for the purpose of joining a federation or national union in the industry or region in which it properly belongs or for the purpose of operating as an independent labor group.”
[210] Article 241, pars. (c) and (j) are shown here as amended by Sec. 16 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[211] As amended by Sec. 17 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[212] As amended by Sec. 7 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[213] As amended by **B.P. Blg. 70** (1980).
[214] As amended by **E.O. No. 111** (1986).
[215] As amended by Section 8 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[216] As inserted by Sec. 9 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[217] As amended by **B.P. Blg. 70** (1980). Article 264 has been renumbered as Article 279.
[218] As amended by **B.P. Blg. 70** (1980). The third paragraph was later further amended by Sec. 19 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[219] Renumbered as Articles 278 and 279, respectively.
[220] Third paragraph is shown here as amended by Sec. 19 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[221] As amended by Sec. 6 of **B.P. Blg. 130** (1981).
[222] This actually refers to Article 241, par. (o), renumbered as Article 250, par. (o), of this Code.
[223] Note that under Article 274 (previously Article 261), except flagrant and/or malicious refusal to comply with economic provisions, CBA violations are mere grievances, not ULP, thus subject to grievance machinery and voluntary arbitration.
[224] As amended by **B.P. Blg. 130** (1981).
[225] Note that under Article 274 (previously Article 261), except flagrant and/or malicious refusal to comply with economic provisions, CBA violations are mere grievances, not ULP, thus subject to grievance machinery and voluntary arbitration.
[226] As amended by Sec. 20 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[227] Incorporated as a new article by Sec. 21 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[228] As amended by Sec. 4 of **B.P. Blg. 227** (1982).
[229] Renumbered as Articles 225 and 279, respectively.
[230] As amended by Sec. 22 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[231] Sec 1, Rule I, Book V of the Omnibus Rules defines “bargaining unit” as a group of employees sharing mutual interests within a given employer unit, comprised of all or less than all of the entire body of employees in the employer unit or any specific occupational or geographical grouping within such employer unit.
[232] As amended by Sec. 10 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007)
[233] As amended by Section 11 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[234] Inserted as a new provision by Section 12 of **R.A. No. 9481** (2007).
[235] As amended by Sec. 25 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[236] Title VIII-A was incorporated as a new chapter after the old Article 259 by **R.A. No. 6715** (1989). See also Rule XIX of D.O. 40-03, *Grievance Machinery and* *Voluntary Arbitration.*
[237] The procedure in handling grievances is detailed in Rule XIX, Book V of the Omnibus Rules. The procedure applies as well to grievance machinery that may be set up in unionized employers.
[238] As amended by **B.P. Blg. 130** (1981) . Pars. (c) and (f), as amended by **E.O. No. 111** (1986). Pars. (g) and (i), as amended by Sec. 27 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[239] Sec. 16 of Rule XXII of the Implementing Rules of Book V of the Labor Code of the Philippines, as added by **D.O. No. 40-H-13** (2010) lists the following industries /services as “indispensable to the national interest”: (a) hospital sector; (b) electric power industry; (c) water supply services, to exclude small water supply services such as bottling and refilling stations; (d) air traffic control; and € such other industries as maybe recommended by the National Tripartite Industrial Peace Council (TIPC). Likewise, Sec. 22 of **R.A. No. 8791** , *The General Banking Law of 2000* , declares the banking industry as “indispensable to the national interest.” **Sec. 19 of D.O. No. 40-G-03** (2010), as amended by **Sec. 5 of D.O. No. 40-H-13** (2013), provides that the “police force shall keep out of the picketlines unless actual violence or other criminal acts occur therein” but “any public officer, the Secretary of Labor and Employment or the NLRC may seek the assistance of law enforcement agencies to maintain peace and order, protect life and property, and/or enforce the law and legal order pursuant to the provisions of the *Joint* *DOLE-PNP-PEZA Guidelines in the Conduct of PNP Personnel, Economic Zone Police and Security Guards, Company Security Guards and Similar Personnel During* *Labor Disputes* .”
[240] As amended by **B.P. Blg. 227** (1982). Par. (d), as amended by **E.O. No. 111** (1986).
[241] Incorporated by Sec. 28 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[242] Sec. 20 of **E.O. No. 126** (1987) created the Center for Labor Studies which “shall absorb the research and publication functions of the Institute of Labor and Manpower Studies which is hereby abolished in accordance with Section 29 (b).” It mandated the Center to “study and develop innovative and indigenous approaches towards the promotion of harmonious and productive labor-management relations and the improvement of workers’ welfare services.” Six months later, Sec. 3 of **E.O. No. 251** (1987) amended E.O. No. 126 and created the Institute for Labor Studies.
[243] As amended by Sec. 29 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[244] Par. (a), as amended by Sec. 30 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989). Par. (b), as amended by Sec. 7 of **B.P. Blg. 227** (1982). Sec. 20 of **D.O. No. 40-H-13** , Series of 2013, provides that the “regular courts shall have jurisdiction over any criminal action” … “but subject to the required clearance from the DOLE on cases arising out of or related to a labor dispute pursuant to the Ministry of Justice (now Department of Justice) Circular No. 15, Series of 1982, and Circular No. 9, Series of 1986.
[245] Renumbered as Article 279.
[246] Par. (b), as amended by Sec. 16 of **B.P. Blg. 130** (1981) and Sec. 7 of B.P. Blg. 227 (1982).
[247] As amended by Sec. 31 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[248] As amended by Sec. 1 of **R.A. No. 10395** (2013), *An Act Strengthening Tripartism.*
[249] Pars. (a), (b), (c), (f), (h), and (i), as amended and added by Sec. 33 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989). Pars. (e) and (g), as added by Sec. 14 of **B.P. Blg. 130** (1981).
[250] Renumbered as Article 298.
[251] Please see **D.O. No. 147** (2015), *Amending the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Book VI of the Labor Code, As Amended.*
[252] As amended by Sec. 34 of **R.A. No. 6715** (1989).
[253] Refer to **D.O. No. 147-15** (2015), *Amending the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Book VI of the Labor Code of the Philippines* .
[254] See also **DOLE D.O. No. 215 (2020)** .
[255] As amended by **R.A. No. 7641** (1992), which provided “for retirement pay to qualified private sector employees in the absence of any retirement plan in the establishment” and further amended by **R.A. No. 8558** (1998), which reduced the retirement age of underground mine workers from sixty (60) to fifty (50). **R.A. No. 10757** (2015), on the other hand, reduced the retirement age of surface mine workers from sixty (60) to fifty (50) years. Additionally, **R.A. No. 10789** (2016) reduced the retirement age of racehorse jockeys to fifty-five (55) years. See also **DOLE D.O. No. 167** (2016), **DOLE D.O. No. 169** (2017), and the **DOLE** **Handbook on Workers Statutory Monetary Benefits** , 2016 Edition.
[256] As amended by Sec. 3 of **B.P. Blg. 70** (1980).
[257] The provision of this Article has been rendered obsolete by the institutionalization of the maternity leave benefits in the SSS in the case of private employment and the GSIS in case of public employment.
[258] The OEDB and the NSB have been abolished by virtue of **E.O. No. 797** (1982). Sec. 4 of EO No. 797 created the POEA which assumed the functions of the OEDB, the NSB, and the overseas employment functions of the BES.
