---

**PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 603**

**THE CHILD AND YOUTH WELFARE CODE**

**Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December, 1974.**

---

**CHAPTER III
Youthful Offenders**

**Article 189.** *Youthful Offender Defined.* - A youthful offender is one who is over nine years but under twenty-one years of age at the time of the commission of the offense.

A child nine years of age or under at the time of the offense shall be exempt from criminal liability and shall be committed to the care of his or her father or mother, or nearest relative or family friend in the discretion of the court and subject to its supervision. The same shall be done for a child over nine years and under fifteen years of age at the time of the commission of the offense, unless he acted with discernment, in which case he shall be proceeded against in accordance with Article 192.

The provisions of Article 80 of the Revised Penal Code shall be deemed modified by the provisions of this Chapter.

**Article 190.** *Physical and Mental Examination.* - It shall be the duty of the law-enforcement agency concerned to take the youthful offender, immediately after his apprehension, to the proper medical or health officer for a thorough physical and mental examination. Whenever treatment for any physical or mental defect is indicated, steps shall be immediately undertaken to provide the same.

The examination and treatment papers shall form part of the record of the case of the youthful offender.

**Article 191.** *Care of Youthful Offender Held for Examination or Trial.* - A youthful offender held for physical and mental examination or trial or pending appeal, if unable to furnish bail, shall from the time of his arrest be committed to the care of the Department of Social Welfare or the local rehabilitation center or a detention home in the province or city which shall be responsible for his appearance in court whenever required: Provided, That in the absence of any such center or agency within a reasonable distance from the venue of the trial, the provincial, city and municipal jail shall provide quarters for youthful offenders separate from other detainees. The court may, in its discretion, upon recommendation of the Department of Social Welfare or other agency or agencies authorized by the Court, release a youthful offender on recognizance, to the custody of his parents or other suitable person who shall be responsible for his appearance whenever required.

**Article 192.** *Suspension of Sentence and Commitment of Youthful Offender.* - If after hearing the evidence in the proper proceedings, the court should find that the youthful offender has committed the acts charged against him the court shall determine the imposable penalty, including any civil liability chargeable against him. However, instead of pronouncing judgment of conviction, the court shall suspend all further proceedings and shall commit such minor to the custody or care of the Department of Social Welfare, or to any training institution operated by the government, or duly licensed agencies or any other responsible person, until he shall have reached twenty-one years of age or, for a shorter period as the court may deem proper, after considering the reports and recommendations of the Department of Social Welfare or the agency or responsible individual under whose care he has been committed.

The youthful offender shall be subject to visitation and supervision by a representative of the Department of Social Welfare or any duly licensed agency or such other officer as the Court may designate subject to such conditions as it may prescribe.

**Article 193.** *Appeal.* - The youthful offender whose sentence is suspended can appeal from the order of the court in the same manner as appeals in criminal cases.

**Article 194.** *Care and Maintenance of Youthful Offender*. - The expenses for the care and maintenance of the youthful offender whose sentence has been suspended shall be borne by his parents or those persons liable to support him: Provided, That in case his parents or those persons liable to support him can not pay all or part of said expenses, the municipality in which the offense was committed shall pay one-third of said expenses or part thereof; the province to which the municipality belongs shall pay one-third; and the remaining one-third shall be borne by the National Government. Chartered cities shall pay two-thirds of said expenses; and in case a chartered city cannot pay said expenses, part of the internal revenue allotments applicable to the unpaid portion shall be withheld and applied to the settlement of said indebtedness.

All city and provincial governments must exert efforts for the immediate establishment of local detention homes for youthful offenders.

**Article 195.** *Report on Conduct of Child.* - The Department of Social Welfare or its representative or duly licensed agency or individual under whose care the youthful offender has been committed shall submit to the court every four months or oftener as may be required in special cases, a written report on the conduct of said youthful offender as well as the intellectual, physical, moral, social and emotional progress made by him.

**Article 196.** *Dismissal of the Case.* - If it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the youthful offender whose sentence has been suspended, has behaved properly and has shown his capability to be a useful member of the community, even before reaching the age of majority, upon recommendation of the Department of Social Welfare, it shall dismiss the case and order his final discharge.

**Article 197.** *Return of the Youth Offender to Court.* - Whenever the youthful offender has been found incorrigible or has wilfully failed to comply with the conditions of his rehabilitation programs, or should his continued stay in the training institution be inadvisable, he shall be returned to the committing court for the pronouncement of judgment.

When the youthful offender has reached the age of twenty-one while in commitment, the court shall determine whether to dismiss the case in accordance with the next preceding article or to pronounce the judgment of conviction.

In any case covered by this article, the youthful offender shall be credited in the service of his sentence with the full time spent in actual commitment and detention effected under the provisions of this Chapter.

**Article 198.** *Effect of Release of Child Based on Good Conduct.* - The final release of a child pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall not obliterate his civil liability for damages. Such release shall be without prejudice to the right for a writ of execution for the recovery of civil damages.

**Article 199.** *Living Quarters for Youthful Offenders Sentence.* - When a judgment of conviction is pronounced in accordance with the provisions of Article 197, and at the time of said pronouncement the youthful offender is still under twenty-one, he shall be committed to the proper penal institution to serve the remaining period of his sentence: Provided, That penal institutions shall provide youthful offenders with separate quarters and, as far as practicable, group them according to appropriate age levels or other criteria as will insure their speedy rehabilitation: Provided, further, That the Bureau of Prisons shall maintain agricultural and forestry camps where youthful offenders may serve their sentence in lieu of confinement in regular penitentiaries.

**Article 200.** *Records of Proceedings.* - Where a youthful offender has been charged before any city or provincial fiscal or before any municipal judge and the charges have been ordered dropped, all the records of the case shall be destroyed immediately thereafter.

Where a youthful offender has been charged and the court acquits him, or dismisses the case or commits him to an institution and subsequently releases him pursuant to this Chapter, all the records of his case shall be destroyed immediately after such acquittal, dismissal or release, unless civil liability has also been imposed in the criminal action, in which case such records shall be destroyed after satisfaction of such civil liability. The youthful offender concerned shall not be held under any provision of law, to be guilty of perjury or of concealment or misrepresentation by reason of his failure to acknowledge the case or recite any fact related thereto in response to any inquiry made of him for any purpose.

"Records" within the meaning of this article shall include those which may be in the files of the National Bureau of Investigation and with any police department, or any other government agency which may have been involved in the case.

**Article 201.** *Civil Liability of Youthful Offenders.* - The civil liability for acts committed by a youthful offender shall devolve upon the offender's father and, in case of his death or incapacity, upon the mother, or in case of her death or incapacity, upon the guardian. Civil liability may also be voluntarily assumed by a relative or family friend of the youthful offender.

**Article 202.** *Rehabilitation Centers.* - The Department of Social Welfare shall establish regional rehabilitation centers for youthful offenders. The local government and other non-governmental entities shall collaborate and contribute their support for the establishment and maintenance of these facilities.
