P.D. No. 1239







---

**MALACAANG**
M a n i l a

**PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1239**

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF IMELDA IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

WHEREAS, it is the desired aim of the State to afford every opportunity to speed-up the pace of progress throughout the land, particularly the areas where both political and economic consideration among others, constitute a serious impediment to the early realization of the goals of the New Society;

WHEREAS, there is that imperative necessity to create self-reliant communities for the purpose of maximizing the efficacy of law and order as will facilitate full development thereof, as it has been the perennial clamor of the residents therein for they stand to benefit economically, socially and politically;

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed municipality will redound and contribute greatly to the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree, as part of the law of the land, the following:

**Section 1.** Barangays Little Baguio, Lumbog, Canaan, Sta. Barbara, Sta. Fe, Upper Baloran and Lower Baloran, all in the Municipality of Malangas and Barangays San Jose, Ganiangan, Lumpanac, La Victoria, Guintolan, Balungisan, Pulauan, Mali-Little Baguio and Balian Israel, all in the Municipality of Siay and Barangays Daluyan, Dumpoc and Balogo, all in the Municipality of Alicia, are hereby detached and separated from their respective municipalities and constituted into a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Imelda in the province of Zamboanga del Sur. The seat of government in the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Sta. Fe.

**Section 2.** Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the Municipality of Imelda.

**Section 3.** The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Malangas shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of Imelda until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President.

Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Imelda shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

**Section 4.** Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of Imelda in their obligations, funds, assets, and other property of the Municipalities of Malangas, Siay and Alicia shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon the recommendation of Commission on Audit.

**Section 5.** All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed and modified accordingly.

**Section 6.** This decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Seven.





---
